# Analysis of Node Attack in MANET and Intrusion Detection Using AI

Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) is a decentralized wireless network that is self-configuring, self-organizing, and does not rely on preexisting infrastructure. Due to its open and dynamic structure, MANET is more susceptible to intrusion, affecting the overall network functionality, reliability, and performance. Active attacks like black-hole attacks, hello flooding attacks, and denial of service (DoS) attacks are common types of attacks in MANET. Nodes in a MANET work simultaneously as a host and a router to do transmission and reception. As a result, it is easier to attack them, and any node can be under attack at any point in time. Dynamically changing topology makes it is even more challenging to detect the attacker node. It is imperative to identify the malicious nodes within the shortest possible time to immediately isolate the compromised nodes and save the rest of the network. In this paper, different node attacks in a MANET are modeled and simulated in OMNET++ for different mobility models and node speed. Obtained results are analyzed in terms of data packet delivery ratio (PDR), end-to-end delay, network throughput, and energy consumption. This helps us understand the impact of different node attacks in MANET and can be used to enhance the performance of the existing protocols. Moreover, this paper also presents an offline intrusion detection system (IDS) using an artificial neural network (ANN) that identifies the attacker node in the MANET. This is achieved by classifying normal and threat patterns, and the approach is validated using data obtained from OMNET++ simulation. The results show that the IDS is 97.80% accurate and can detect attacker nodes successfully.
